Srividya: Hello, my name is Srividya Karumuri
and I'm a GPU Compiler Engineer at Apple.
Today I'm here to share some tips
that can improve the performance of your Metal shaders.
The new Apple Family 9 GPU
in M3 and A17 Pro have some new advancements
that you could apply to your application.
I have some recommendations for Apple Family 9 GPUs.
In addition to guidance tips
and tricks that apply to all Apple GPU generations.
You can improve your shader's performance
by reducing their runtime
with features in the Metal shading language,
increasing parallelism by improving resource utilization
from the shader,
and making the most of the ray tracing acceleration
hardware in the Apple Family 9 GPUs.
Metal has several features
that can minimize the shader's runtime including,
function constants, which can efficiently specialize
a shader, function groups which can optimize shaders
using indirect function calls.
The Metal function constants
features specializes the shader efficiently
and removes the code that isn't reachable at runtime.
For example, uber shaders typically benefit
from function constants.
An uber shader is often complex
because it can handle many different possibilities
at runtime, such as rendering different material types
in a 3D application.
Developers sometimes make uber shaders
that read material parameters from a buffer
and then a material shader chooses different control parts
at runtime based on the buffer's contents.
This approach lets the shader render a new material effect
without recompiling because the only changes
are parameters in the buffer.
For example, this uber shader in a pipeline
renders a glossy material
because a Metal buffer in the draw command
has an is_glossy parameter that's equal to true.
The same shader can also render a matte material
when the buffer's is_glossy parameter is equal to false.
The render pipeline is the same for both material effects
because the behavior change comes from what's in the buffer.
This responsive approach is great during development,
however, the shader has to account for several possibilities
and read from additional buffers
which may affect an app's performance.
Another approach is to specialize the shader
at compile time instead of at runtime.
By building the shader variance offline
with preprocessor macros.
This is an uber shader specialized using macros.
Each specialized shader has its own render pipeline
and only has the code it needs
for rendering a specific material effect.
This approach means you have to compile all the possible
variant combinations offline.
For example, a glossy variant could be the combination
of enabling both is_glossy and use_shadows macros,
by disabling the remaining macros.
Similarly, a matte function variant could be a combination
of the use_shadows and has_reflections macros.
And a glossy reflections variant enables the is_glossy
and has_reflections macros and so on.
Implementing an uber shader
with macros can mean compiling a large number
of variants, such as one variant
for each possible macro combination.
Some of which your app may never use.
Even if you compile them offline ahead of time,
each variant adds up which can significantly increase
the size of your Metal library.
It can also increase compile time
because each shade of variant has to be compiled
starting from Metal source.
Function constants can provide another way
to specialize the shaders.
Compared to using macros, it can reduce both compile time
and the size of the Metal library.
With function constants,
you compile an uber shader one time from source
to an intermediate Metal function.
From that function, you only create the variance
your app needs based on function constants you define.
Function constants give you the flexibility
to both create multiple specialized variants
on the go as needed
and reuse an intermediate Metal function
for all remaining possibilities.
With this approach, you can save time
and space by creating only the shader variance
and render pipelines you need.
You can create these specialized variance
by declaring function constants in your Metal function code
and then defining each of their values
as you create Metal functions.
You can also use function constants
to initialize program scope variables
that you declare in the constant address space.
You can enable different code parts in the shader
with these function constants instead
of reading values from Metal buffers.
With function constants, Metal can fold these
as constant Booleans
as it compiles the shader's specialization variant,
as well as other optimizations,
such as eliminating unreachable code parts.
And that can remove unused control flow.
By specializing shader with function constants,
you don't need to query material parameters
from buffers anymore.
This approach reduces the shaders runtime
by simplifying its control flow
and removing unused code parts.
I encourage you to watch, "Optimize GPU renders with Metal,"
which goes over the details on how to set
function constant values at runtime.
It also goes over how to mitigate
the runtime compilation overhead
with a synchronous compilation.
You can also reduce your shaders runtime
by adding the function group's attribute
for indirect function calls.
An indirect function is a function the shader calls
without directly invoking by its name,
such as with function pointers or visible function tables.
A shader can call an indirect function through static
or dynamic linking, indirect function calls make the code
extensible and give your app more options for flexibility.
However, indirect function calls can prevent Metal
from fully optimizing the shader,
especially around the call site.
For statically linked functions,
you can use the Metal function group's feature,
which lets Metal optimize the shader
with indirect function calls.
This shader invokes three different indirect functions
including calls through function pointers for lighting,
and a material.
Metal can't optimize across
these function pointer call sites
because it has no visibility which functions
the shader is calling.
However, when you know
that the function pointers can only point to one
of the specific group of functions,
you can use the function group's attribute.
For example, the only functions the shader could call
are all the linked functions in the shaders pipeline state,
and you may know that the lighting function can only invoke
the area, spot or sphere functions.
In that case, you can group these functions
into your lighting function group.
Similarly, if the material function pointer can only invoke
the wood, glass or metal functions,
then you can group them into your material function group.
You can give Metal a hint on how
to optimize an indirect call
by adding the function group's attribute at the call site.
You define the function groups by assigning a dictionary
to a linked functions group's property.
Each dictionary entry is a string key, which is the name
of the function group, and the value is an area of functions
that belong to that group.
Note that this approach only helps for functions
that you statically link, functions you compile
to a binary library will not benefit from this.
Check out these two videos
to learn more about the Metal function pointers
and the various compilation workflows.
In summary, two ways to reduce a shader's runtime
are function constants,
which can create a specialized variant
of the shader efficiently,
and function groups that can optimize the shader
where it invokes indirect functions.
Having looked at some Metal features
that can reduce the shader's execution time,
let's see some ways to improve the resource utilization
leading to increased parallelism.
Increasing the thread occupancy is very important
to improve latency hiding in shader execution.
Thread occupancy really depends on the amount
of available resources, be it registers or memory.
So optimized usage of data from the shader
can increase thread occupancy.
Apple Family 9 GPUs have new advancements related
to occupancy management.
For more details, please check out,
"Explore GPU advancements in M3 and A17 Pro."
And to learn how to triage
the lower thread occupancy bottlenecks, please check out,
"Discover new Metal profiling tools
for M3 and A17 Pro."
The address space of memory objects
and the data type used in ALU operations
can impact the resource utilization.
Choosing the right address space
for a memory object is very important
for better memory utilization
and to improve the thread occupancy.
In Metal shading language, address spaces are designed
to support different access patterns
and to specify the region of memory
from where memory objects are allocated.
Picking the right address space will directly impact
the performance of shaders.
We are going to focus our attention on constant device
and threadgroup address spaces.
Constant address space allows you to create memory objects
that are read only.
These accesses are optimized for data
that is constant across all thread software
dispatch or draw.
If the size of the object is fixed,
and if the object is read many times by different threads,
then create those objects in constant address space.
You can create read/write buffers in device address space.
If the data being accessed is varying across the threads
or if the size of the buffer is not fixed,
then you can create such buffers in device address space.
Check out, "Optimize Metal Performance
for Apple silicon Macs," for more details on constant
and device address space recommendations with examples.
Threadgroup address space
is for read/write memory objects too.
Threads in the threadgroup can work together
by sharing data in the threadgroup memory.
They're often faster in most cases.
In some use cases, threadgroup memory is used
as a software-managed cache of device or constant buffers.
For example, blocks of device memory are copied
into threadgroup memory to operate with.
It can be faster in some cases.
With the new advancements in Apple Family 9 GPUs
shader code memory, the trade-offs on when to use
threadgroup memory might be different from prior GPUs.
In your shader, if the use of threadgroup memory
is primarily to use as a software-managed cache of device
or constant buffers, then it may be more performant to read
directly from those buffers instead of copying
to threadgroup memory.
With Apple Family 9 GPUs dynamic shader core memory
and flexible on-chip memory features,
threadgroup device constant memory types are using
the same cache hierarchy,
so if your working set size fits in the cache,
then both the buffer and threadgroup memory access
might have similar performance characteristics.
In those cases, instead of creating copies of memory
in threadgroup and device or constant address space,
shader can just operate with the device or constant buffers
and avoid the latencies involved with copying
to threadgroup memory.
Additional guidance on whether keeping the data
just in device or constant buffers is beneficial or not,
can be evaluated by profiling the workload
using Metal debugger in Xcode.
Similar to address-based selection,
data type can impact the performance too.
For instance, 16-bit data types can help reduce
the register and memory footprint.
Using 16-bit data types such as half and short
over float and int when possible allows better performance.
Conversions are free, so don't worry about converting
between types such as between half and float.
Bfloat is a 16-bit truncated version of float
best suited for accelerating machine learning applications.
It allows wide range of values at a lower precision
Bfloat data type has been supported since Metal 3.1.
If your application has precision requirements that match
with what is supported by bfloat, it is highly recommended
to use this data type.
Using 16-bit data types rather than 32-bit data types
results in shader using fewer registers.
If that data is stored in memory,
it can also help reduce the memory footprint
and improve bandwidth.
As a result, it can lead to better thread occupancy.
Using 16-bit data types also improves the energy efficiency.
When writing expressions that are meant
to be evaluated at half decision, be sure
to use 'h' suffix on any literals.
Otherwise, the entire expression will be evaluated
at a float precision and that will lose the benefits
of using smaller types.
In some shaders, it can result in better instruction mix
by using half type,
such as having a mix of float,
half and int type instructions.
This can result in better utilization
of ALU pipelines in Apple Family 9 GPU,
and it can improve the instruction throughput.
To summarize, improve resource utilization
by choosing the right address space
based on the memory usage pattern.
Choosing 16-bit data types can help reduce the register
and memory footprint and in some cases it can result
in better utilization of the ALU parallelism
in Apple Family 9 GPUs.
For ray tracing shaders too,
it is important to reduce shader execution time
and improve resource utilization in order
to improve the performance.
To render with Metal ray tracing, the first step
is to define your scene geometry
and build an acceleration structure
to allow efficient intersection.
Intersection is performed from a GPU function
that creates a ray.
This GPU function makes an intersector object
to perform intersection.
The result returned from intersection
will have all the information you may need to either shade
the pixel or process it further.
The intersector component of this process
is hardware accelerated on Apple Family 9 GPUs.
The hardware intersector is responsible
for traversing the acceleration structure,
invoking intersection functions
and updating the state of the traversal
based upon the result of intersection.
The intersector is the fundamental API
for Metal ray tracing.
Using intersection functions, ray payload,
intersection tags and the intersection in optimal way
can improve the ray tracing performance.
Custom intersection functions are a powerful way to define
how rays hit surfaces,
but use custom intersection functions only when necessary.
Custom intersection functions are important
for implementing features like alpha testing.
Alpha testing is used to add more geometric detail
to the scene, like in the chains and leaves from this image.
Alpha testing is implemented
by using a custom intersection function.
The logic inside custom intersection functions
is responsible for accepting or rejecting intersections
as the ray traverses the acceleration structure.
In this case, the custom intersection function logic
will reject the first intersection,
but it will accept the second intersection
since an opaque surface has been intersected.
Custom intersection functions can enable additional logic
to be executed on the shader course.
Use it only when necessary.
The opaque triangle intersectors are the fastest path.
If you need custom intersection functions,
note that the hardware will be sorting
and grouping by intersection function.
Having a lot of intersection functions will make it harder
to find matches and group,
so avoid duplicate intersection functions
to help in grouping optimally.
And take advantage of the Metal intersection function
table indexing mechanism to create simple tables
with one entry per function.
To run the intersection test, the hardware intersection
creates SIMDgroup for multiple rays
and then each ray is tested against multiple
primitives in parallel.
Since the custom intersection functions
are running in parallel, they will need to be serialized
if they perform any operation that has side effects.
This includes memory writes to the payload
or other device memory.
Similarly, any operations that introduce divergence
such as indirect function calls will also reduce
the parallelism of the intersection function execution.
It's best to perform these operations as late as possible
in the intersection function
to allow maximum parallelism until that point.
In this example, ray payload is updated first
and then some work unrelated
to the payload update is performed.
This will cause all the code
after payload update to be run serially.
Instead, you can modify the intersection function
to have all the work unrelated to the payload update
to be done first and then update the payload.
This will maximize the intersection function parallelism.
Returning to the hardware intersector model,
this flow chart explains the process,
but it is overlooking one vital element.
During intersection, ray trace scratch space
is used to store the state of the traversal
and return results to the GPU function calling intersect.
The intersector API supports a payload for each ray.
The larger the payload structure is
the more impact it will have on ray tracing performance.
When it comes to ray payload,
the intersection result may have most of the data you need
and it is best to avoid using any ray payload.
If you need a payload,
avoid a global uber payload structure.
Instead, specialize the structure for each intersect call.
Minimize the size of the structure with packed data types
and remove any fields that are not needed.
Optimizing ray payload usage will result
in more rays being processed.
For example, consider a basic payload
with the intersection position,
a flag to indicate a hit, and a color.
In memory, the fields would be laid out like this.
The position member would be at the start
and due to its size and alignment,
the hit flag would be 16 bytes from the start,
but then the RGB member is at a byte offset of 32,
making an overall struct size of 48 bytes.
By changing the flow three values
to their packed equivalence,
there is less space lost to alignment.
The hit flag can be removed since it is not needed
when using the Metal ray tracing API,
you can just check the type
of intersection in the intersection result.
This is easy to use and more performant,
especially for visibility rays like shadows and occlusion.
Similarly, the position can be computer-based
on the ray's origin, direction
and the intersection distance from the result.
And then to reduce the size further,
the RGB color can be packed
to four bytes in the intersection function using the packing
methods in Metal shading language.
In this example, ray data payload structure started off
with the size of 48 bytes and reduced to four bytes.
By using such methods, you can optimize your array payload
to improve the rate tracing performance.
Like ray payload, intersection tags also affect
ray tracing performance in a similar way.
Another contributor to ray tracing scratch usage
is the intersection tags on the intersector.
These tags are the additional state
for the traversal to track.
The world space data tag in this declaration means
that the object to world
and world to object matrices have to be stored for each ray.
This adds to the retracing scratch usage
and will impact occupancy during the intersect call.
The other important thing to note with the tags
is that they need to match between the intersector
and the intersection functions that it calls.
Intersector is better than intersection query
because of how the intersection query API impacts
the ray tracing performance.
Looking at the hardware intersector model, it is a great fit
for the intersector in the shading language.
An intersection query defines an object
that does not use custom intersection functions.
The intersection code is executed
in the original GPU function
and the hardware intersector needs to wait
until the code completes before continuing the traversal.
If you choose to use intersection query,
the hardware has no custom intersection functions to sort
and cannot group the execution.
It also needs to use more ray tracing scratch memory
to allow it to return to the GPU function.
Intersection query is the alternative model
for ray intersection to support portability
from other shading languages.
Since intersector aligns with the hardware implementation,
prefer intersector over intersection query.
If you do need to use intersection query,
use as few query objects as possible.
If multiple intersection queries are necessary,
try to reuse the query object, but change the properties.
This enables reuse of the ray tracing scratch for one query.
For example, if you have an intersection query object IQ1
for doing some ray tracing work,
and then if you need to do more ray tracing work
with the opaque opacity set,
then instead of creating new intersection query object,
simply use the intersection params
to reset the existing intersection query object
with opaque opacity.
This way you can reuse the ray tracing scratch memory.
When using multiple intersection queries,
avoid switching between them
and overlapping their traversal.
This avoids expensive swaps
between the in-progress hardware traversals.
For example, in your ray tracing work,
instead of switching from IQ1 to IQ2
and then back to IQ1.
Continue with IQ1 and complete the ray tracing work
with it before switching to IQ2.
To summarize ray tracing best practices,
use custom intersection function only when necessary.
Optimize ray payload.
Minimize the number of intersection tags.
Use intersector over intersection query.
To learn more about ray tracing with Metal,
please watch, "Your guide to Metal ray tracing."
And to learn how to use new ray tracing counters
from Metal debugger in Xcode,
check out, "Discover new Metal profiling tools for M3
and A17 Pro."
To recap, in order to improve performance
of your Metal shaders, you can reduce shader execution time
by using Metal features like function constants
and function groups.
Using such features can enable more optimization
opportunities in Metal, improve thread occupancy
with better resource utilization to increase parallelism.
Apply the best practices for intersection function,
ray payload, intersection tags,
and the intersector to make the best use
of the hardware accelerated ray tracing.
Thank you very much.